+++
title = "Why I Prefer Prefix Notation"
date = 2022-07-23

[taxonomies]
tags = ["rambles"]
+++

"Only 0.01% can solve this!" "99% Fail!"

It feels almost too obvious to be worthy of pointing out, but such captions often accompany some simple looking mathematical expression, invariably sans parantheses. Something like:

`3 - 3 * 6 + 3`

<!-- more -->


The comments on such posts usually fall into two main categories. The first is the 'correct' answer, in the case of the above expression it would be... `-12`, at least according to both python and the Google calculator. My secondary school teacher would say to first evaluate `3 * 6`, to get `18` and the expression `3 - 18 + 3`. Following BODMAS, we get addition next, which gets us `21`. Finally, evaluating `3 - 21` and we get... `-18`. Didn't Python say `-12`? Where did `-12` come from?

Maybe Python is simply evaluating the expression from left to right, so let's try that: `3 - 3 * 6 + 3 -> 0 * 6 + 3 -> 0 + 3 -> 3`. 

So simply evaluating left-to-right gets us `3`, a completely new answer.

The `-12` answer comes from what turns out to be the *actual* correct interpretation of the order of operation. Aftering resolving the expression to the form `3 - 18 + 3`, it would be more correct to interpret it as the following: `3 + (-18) + 3`, before reducing the expression down: `3 + 3 + (-18) = 6 + (-18) = -12`.

So `-12` **is** the correct answer after all, even though according to the BODMAS I was taught in school, `-18` would seem to be the answer. The `-12` being the correct answer relies on recognising subtraction as being addition of a negative number, which following BODMAS (Which puts 'S' for subtraction after 'A' for addition), is obfuscated.

All of this is to say that an expression as simple as `3 - 3 * 6 + 3` should not be **this** ambiguous. Each of the answers, `-18`, `-12`, and `3` could all be considered valid. What makes `-12` the canonical answer? 

Thinking of expressions as having 'canonically' correct answers may not be the best way of thinking about it. Expressions are after all just a way of *expressing* relations or quantities or formulas. Yet the ambiguity present in `3 - 3 * 6 + 3` still clearly has a real world effect, such that people ask on Quora the values of similar expressions. The presence of disagreement at all in the comments of posts should indicate a failure in the actual ability of such an expression to *express* its actual meaning. 

## An Alternative

I am a big fan of the Lisp-family of languages. To grossly oversimplify, in Lisp prefix notation is used. It's not quite the same prefix notation as seen in Polish notation, which is similar to how some stack-based languages notate expressions, but I believe the 'Lisp' style is the clearest and most unambiguous style. The expression from earlier, `3 - 3 * 6 + 3` with its 'canon' answer `-12` would be expressed as:

```lisp
(+ (* -3 6) 3 )
```

This evaluates to `-12`, unambiguously. If we wanted to express `-18`, we could write:

```lisp
(- 3 (+ (* 3 6) 3))
```

Or if we wanted `3`:

```lisp
(+ 3 (* 6 (- 3 3)))
```

Each expression has a single, *unambiguously* correct answer. No argument over whether BODMAS or simply evaluating from left-to-right or anything else. 

### Inevitably...

There will be people who argue that actually `3 - 3 * 6 + 3` already **is** unambiguously correct, provided you just remember order of operation. Sure. However I argue that such prefix and parenthetical notation is better for eliminating the need for an order of operations altogether.
